[SYCL][DOC] Design document for new mechanism of host -> device objects mapping (#5910)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/design/MappingHostAddressesToDeviceEntities.md

Another example is device global [implementation][device-global-design], where
in order to communicate a value of `device_global` variable between host and
device we need to map its host address to a symbolic name/identifier and some
other info, which is used at PI layer and below.

This design document describes a generic way how to map address of any SYCL
object defined in a namespace scope to its unique symbolic ID. Please note that
this document doesn't try to map the address to something other than a unique
symbolic ID: other required information is usually generated by the device
compiler and communicated to the runtime by device image properties. Unique
symbolic ID which can be obtained from mapping mechanism described in this
design document could be used as a key in those properties to propagate
additional information using existing mechanisms.

So, overall the picture looks like:
- device compiler generates property set/s which provide mapping
  "unique symbolic ID" -> "various information required by DPC++ RT"
- device or host compiler generates mapping
  "address of a host variable" -> "unique symbolic ID" (as described below by
  this document)

> - DPC++ RT uses these to mappings to obtain required information and somehow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DPC++ RT uses these two mappings to obtain required information and somehow
```

  uses it

This design document describes two approaches of how the 
"address of a host variable" -> "unique symbolic ID" mapping can be generated:
the first one with integration footer and another one with modification of the
host compiler.

Both approaches have their pros and cons and they are expected to be implemented

> and exists in the implementation at the same time, but only one of them will be

Author: Applied in e6938d89f28538143c51ba3472c9185ead49f953

used at a time depending on whether 3rd-party host compiler is used or not.

Integration footer can be used with 3rd-party host compilers, but it requires

> appending to a translation unit provided by user, which could affect debug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
appending to a translation unit provided by a user, which could affect debug
```

information: since there are no compilers that support appending a file at the
end (similar to `-include`), appending is done by generating a temporary input
file using concatenation of the original input and integration footer.

Such replacement of the main translation unit causes the following issues:
- debug information about the source file might be incorrect, leading to
  problems with gdb `l` command and code coverage tools
- checksum of host and device source files becomes different which causes device
  code debugging to be completely broken in some environments (such as MS Visual
  Studio, for example)

Customizing host compiler allows to avoid issues with debuggers and code

> coverage tools, but that is not an option if user wants to compile host part

Reviewer: ```suggestion
coverage tools, but that is not an option if a user wants to compile host part
```

Author: Applied in 6c7a9be71e57c2855e87e18de145a833629dc060

of an app with a 3rd-party host compiler.

Further sections describe the implementation design of both approaches in more
details, note that there are few components which should be modified regardless
of which approach is in use.

## Common front-end part

DPC++ FE should support the following attribute:
`[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]`. This attribute accepts
a string literal and should be applied to types (like `device_global` or
`specialization_id`).

Presence of the attribute instructs the compiler to perform the following
things:
- emit `sycl-unique-id` LLVM IR attribute on each definition of a variable of
  type marked with `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]`
  attribute. `sycl-unique-id` LLVM IR attribute should be accompanied by a
  unique string identifier of a variable it is attached to. The rules for
  creating this string are the same as for `__builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id` and
  the same algorithm can be used when generating the string for the attribute

> - emit `sycl-uid-type` LLVM IR attribute alongside `sycl-unique-id`, which

Reviewer 2: Is there a difference in later handling of spec constants and device globals?

Author: For the purposes of generating "host address" -> "unique symbolic ID" mapping no, there is no difference between spec constants and device global.

For the purposes of making those two features functional, yes, the further handling is different for those two, i.e. we have separate passes for spec constants and device globals and that won't change with this proposal.

  contains the `kind` string passed to
  `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` attribute

**TODO**: we have `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` attribute documented in
[device global design doc][device-global-design], which instructs front-end to
emit some additional semantic checking. Shall we leave it in place or that
request for semantic checking should also be documented by
`[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` attribute when `kind`
is set to a certain value?

**TODO**: alternatively, we could completely re-use existing
`[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` attribute and introduce another one for
specialization constants, i.e. it is a question of whether or not we want to

> generalize unique IDs generation in form of a generic attribute or not.

Reviewer 3: I think I have a slight preference to keep `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` and `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` as separate attributes.

FWIW, I originally proposed a general attribute like `[[__sycl_detail__::restrictions("device_global")]]`, where the parameter would tell the CFE which set of restrictions to enforce.  However, the CFE team preferred having a separate C++ attribute for each set of restriction.  Thus, we have `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` instead.

Author: So, having `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` for setting LLVM IR attribute and having separate `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` for semantic checks is the preferable way, right?

> In order to implement such attribute we should hardcode and keep track of possible "kinds" of uniquely identifiable objects in FE, meaning the FE should diagnose each time the passed kind is not valid and it should be updated for each new kind.

Note that for LLVM IR attribute generation purposes I do not suggest that FE perform any correctness check for `kind` argument except that it is non empty: FE here just serves as a translation layer and headers are responsible to pass the correct string there to ensure that everything will work fine.

Reviewer 3: > So, having `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` for setting LLVM IR attribute and having separate `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` for semantic checks is the preferable way, right?

That sounds good to  me.

Reviewer 2: > Note that for LLVM IR attribute generation purposes I do not suggest that FE perform any correctness check for kind argument except that it is non empty: FE here just serves as a translation layer and headers are responsible to pass the correct string there to ensure that everything will work fine.

Doesn't that introduce the dependency between the headers that will use the attribute and the compiler's layers which will use the "kind" string? I guess somehow it should be made sure that the string is correct, not issuing a diagnostic from FE will make it up to developers.

> So, having [[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]] for setting LLVM IR attribute and having separate [[__sycl_detail__::device_global]] for semantic checks is the preferable way, right?

In my mind it is preferable to leave `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` "as is" and introduce another attribute not accepting any arguments for specialization ids that also may enforce some restrictions and will trigger emission of LLVM IR attributes. No magic strings.

Author: > Doesn't that introduce the dependency between the headers that will use the attribute and the compiler's layers which will use the "kind" string? I guess somehow it should be made sure that the string is correct, not issuing a diagnostic from FE will make it up to developers.

I propose that `kind` string is not parsed by the compiler and simply propagated as-is to runtime through `__register_uniquely_identifiable_object`. That means that there is no dependency between the compiler and the runtime, because runtime should simply expect the same tag it passed to the attribute in headers. 

Various semantic checks/detection of certain variables for additional processing should happen based on some other markup. For example, there is no need to mark `specialization_id` variables to handle them properly: the compiler looks for calls to `__sycl_getSpecializationConstantValue` pseudo-intrinsics. For `device_global`, the compiler checks for `sycl-device-global-size` metadata.

To summarize:
- use existing `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` for semantic checking and special markup (as it is now)
- use new `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` with `kind` not being checked/specially handled at _any_ compilation stage: this is simply a marker which set in headers and propagated as-is back to runtime, i.e. it is headers-runtime interface

Does it look ok?

Note: we could even get rid of `kind` completely, but I think that runtime will benefit from its presence. Would be good to hear from RT folks (@steffenlarsen, @s-kanaev, @romanovvlad)

Reviewer 2: If there will be no dependency between the compiler and runtime, then it sounds ok to me.

> use existing [[__sycl_detail__::device_global]] for semantic checking and special markup (as it is now)
use new [[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]] with kind not being checked/specially handled at any compilation stage: this is simply a marker which set in headers and propagated as-is back to runtime, i.e. it is headers-runtime interface

So, did I get it right that `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` is left for semantic checks, but both `device_global` and `specialization_id` types are marked with `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]` in order to emit LLVM IR attributes?

Reviewer 4: >> Note: we could even get rid of kind completely, but I think that runtime will benefit from its presence. Would be good to hear from RT folks.

Do not see how it could be used other than for debugging in runtime. I would suggest having a `long int` argument which would be reserved for future use instead.

Reviewer 3: It seems to me that the `kind` parameter would be useful.  Without it, the runtime won't be able to tell the difference between different calls to `__register_uniquely_identifiable_object()`.  Won't the runtime want to know whether the call is registering a "device global" variable vs. a "specialization id" variable?  It seems like the runtime might want to store these in different `std::map` objects, for example.  The runtime can only do this if it has the `kind` parameter.

Reviewer 5: >So, did I get it right that [[__sycl_detail__::device_global]] is left for semantic checks, but both device_global and specialization_id types are marked with [[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)] in order to emit LLVM IR attributes?

This is my understanding as well. Can you confirm @AlexeySachkov ? This would mean changing current CodeGen behavior of` [[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]`

Reviewer 4: >> Won't the runtime want to know whether the call is registering a "device global" variable vs. a "specialization id" variable?

The type should be known in all places where runtime needs to map an object address to a string, no?

>>  It seems like the runtime might want to store these in different std::map objects, for example.

I believe a simple `std::unordered_map` with a an address(which should be unique) of the object as a key should be enough.

Author: > > Won't the runtime want to know whether the call is registering a "device global" variable vs. a "specialization id" variable?
>
>The type should be known in all places where runtime needs to map an object address to a string, no?

@romanovvlad, just to understand the idea here better: you plan to have some "string" -> properties mapping available and then each time you need to do something with a spec constant or device global the runtime  will go through "address" -> "string" map and then through "string" -> properties map, right?

> > So, did I get it right that [[sycl_detail::device_global]] is left for semantic checks, but both device_global and specialization_id types are marked with [[sycl_detail::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)] in order to emit LLVM IR attributes?
>
> This is my understanding as well. Can you confirm @AlexeySachkov ? This would mean changing current CodeGen behavior of [[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]

@Fznamznon, @elizabethandrews, yes, that is correct. `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` is only supposed to be used for semantics checks and new attribute `[[sycl_detail::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]` will be used for attribute generation

Reviewer 3: > The type should be known in all places where runtime needs to map an object address to a string, no?

Yes, this is true, but that's not the point I was trying to make.  Consider what the code will look like if we do *not* have the `kind` string:

```
std::unordered_map<void *, std::string> IDMap;

void __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(void *Address, const char *UniqueID) {
  IDMap[Address] = UniqueID;
}

void setSpecializationConstant(void *SpecID, /*...*/) {
  std::string UniqueID = IDMap[SpecID];  // Search through all entries in IDMap
  // ...
}

void setDeviceGlobal(void *DeviceGlobal, /*...*/) {
  std::string UniqueID = IDMap[DeviceGlobal];  // Search through all entries in IDMap
  // ...
}
```

The two  search operations are potentially more expensive because `IDMap` contain a mixture of both  "spec constant" and "device global" entries.  By contrast, consider the code if we do have `kind`:

```
std::unordered_map<void *, std::string> IDMapSpecConstants;
std::unordered_map<void *, std::string> IDMapDeviceGlobals;

void __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(void *Address, const char *UniqueID, const char *Kind) {
  if (std::string("specialization_id") == Kind) {
    IDMapSpecConstants[Address] = UniqueID;
  }
  else if (std::string("device global") == Kind) {
    IDMapDeviceGlobalks[Address] = UniqueID;
  }
}

void setSpecializationConstant(void *SpecID, /*...*/) {
  std::string UniqueID = IDMapSpecConstants[SpecID];
  // ...
}

void setDeviceGlobal(void *DeviceGlobal, /*...*/) {
  std::string UniqueID = IDMapDeviceGlobals[DeviceGlobal];
  // ...
}
```

By keeping separate maps, the search operations are potentially faster because we only search the set that we care about.

I agree that the code works either way, but it seems like you could gain some efficiency if we know the "kind" of the ID in the registration function.

Reviewer 4: >> The two search operations are potentially more expensive because IDMap contain a mixture of both "spec constant" and "device global" entries. 
>> By keeping separate maps, the search operations are potentially faster because we only search the set that we care about.

Do not see any benefit, AFAIK look up complexity for  `std::unordered_map`  is constant. Please, note, the pointer as a key should grantee that there no collision may happen.

Reviewer 4: >> @romanovvlad, just to understand the idea here better: you plan to have some "string" -> properties mapping available and then each time you need to do something with a spec constant or device global the runtime will go through "address" -> "string" map and then through "string" -> properties map, right?

Yes, as a first implementation, then we can consider "merging" these maps at runtime to have only one look up.

Reviewer 6: I agree with Vlad that I don't necessarily think the `kind` is strictly needed. The implementation would likely do something along the lines of what we currently do with `device_global` (or at least do soon) i.e. we put all entries with information about the `device_globals` in a map with a pointer key and then we have another map with string keys (the unique ID) pointing to the entries in the first map.

If we were to make a shared collection holding these common entries, I imagine we would have it be these maps with opaque pointers. When first set they would have some common "uninitialized" value and once an operation tries to get it as some specific kind (`device_global`, `specialization_id`, etc.) it allocates the entry for it.
For `device_global` and `specialization_id` this initialization would happen when loading binaries, which currently for `device_global` happens before the registration, so there are no potential race conditions. However, it is not impossible that some future object using this wouldn't be initialized until some later operation happens, in which case we could have a race condition on the initialization of the map entry.

All this said, I do think not having the kind at the time of initialization potentially adds some complexity to the implementation, as accesses may have to check if their entry exists already and may have to initialize if it isn't. Knowing through the kind during registration means that operations wouldn't have to consider the possibility of an "uninitialized" entry and could simply just cast their pointer (in the hopes that there wasn't a bug somewhere.)

I think both approaches would work, however if we choose to go with the one that passes a kind, I think we should do it through and enum rather than a string. Since CFE passes the value through without caring what it actually is, only the SYCL headers and the SYCL runtime need to agree on this value, so an `enum` would be cheaper.

> Do not see any benefit, AFAIK look up complexity for `std::unordered_map` is constant. Please, note, the pointer as a key should guarantee that there no collision may happen.

Quick note about this. I think you're right about the pointer collision, but for objects like `device_global` the string map is the more frequently used one, which has higher chance of collision the bigger the map is, so if they were to share map with others there could be some negative effects on lookup-performance, though exactly how much is hard to tell.

Reviewer 4: >> All this said, I do think not having the kind at the time of initialization potentially adds some complexity to the implementation, as accesses may have to check if their entry exists already and may have to initialize if it isn't.
>>  Knowing through the kind during registration means that operations wouldn't have to consider the possibility of an "uninitialized" entry and could simply just cast their pointer (in the hopes that there wasn't a bug somewhere.)

Could you please clarify how kind helps to understand an "uninitialized" entry?

>> Quick note about this. I think you're right about the pointer collision, but for objects like device_global the string map is the more frequently used one, which has higher chance of collision the bigger the map is, so if they were to share map with others there could be some negative effects on lookup-performance, though exactly how much is hard to tell.

Could you please elaborate more on this? I'm thinking of
`std::unordered_map</*Object address*/void *, /*Object name*/char *>`. Which scenario would lead to a collision?

>> I think both approaches would work, however if we choose to go with the one that passes a kind, I think we should do it through and enum rather than a string. Since CFE passes the value through without caring what it actually is, only the SYCL headers and the SYCL runtime need to agree on this value, so an enum would be cheaper

+1

Reviewer 6: > Could you please clarify how kind helps to understand an "uninitialized" entry?

The idea would be to have it create an entry with room for the information needed for the given kind, that is the allocations can be made at registration time rather than some time during execution.

> Could you please elaborate more on this? I'm thinking of `std::unordered_map</*Object address*/void *, /*Object name*/char *>`. Which scenario would lead to a collision?

So you're thinking the only shared map is the "ptr -> unique ID" which will be set by the registration, and then the object-specific operations will initialize any other maps they may need? If that's the case, I agree that would be a good solution.

Author: Ok, it seems like we don't have an immediate need for `kind` and therefore, to simplify the design, I'm going to remove that argument - please let me know if you have any objections

Reviewer 4: @AlexeySachkov 
>> please let me know if you have any objections

Can we have a long int argument for future use? We can have on RT level only as a starting point - `__register_uniquely_identifiable_object` takes long int 0 as the last argument.

Author: > > > please let me know if you have any objections
> 
> Can we have a long int argument for future use? We can have on RT level only as a starting point - `__register_uniquely_identifiable_object` takes long int 0 as the last argument.

Ok, that works for me. I will then update the doc:
- the runtime registration function _has_ the extra long int (enum) argument
- the new attribute _does not_ have the argument

This way, our FE and middle-end implementations will be simpler, but our runtime will be ready for future potential change making it easier to maintain the same ABI

When DPC++ compiler is used as both host and device compiler, then the attribute
should be respected by both host and device compiler passes and LLVM IR
attributes should appear in LLVM IR for both host and device code. When DPC++
compiler is only used as a device compiler, then we don't expect the attribute
to be handled on host, apparently.

> Another thing we need from DPC++ FE compiler is to define a special macro, which

Author: Applied in e6938d89f28538143c51ba3472c9185ead49f953

will allow to distinguish it from other compilers. That is needed to apply the
aforementioned attribute conditionally to avoid spamming users with warnings
about unknown attributes.

The suggested macro name is `__INTEL_SYCL_HOST_COMPILER__`. It should be defined
when the compiler is invoked in SYCL host mode (`-fsycl-is-host` `-cc1` flag).

## Common headers part

Header files should be modified by adding the new attributes to types

> declarations, objects of which we will need in our mapping.Again,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
declarations, objects of which we will need in our mapping. Again,
```

Author: Applied in 6c7a9be71e57c2855e87e18de145a833629dc060

  [[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object("specialization_id")]]
#endif
specialization_id {
// ...
};
```

## Common runtime part

The runtime should implement the following function, which will be called from
a code generated by the compiler (see the next section):

```
void __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(
  void *Address, const char* UniqueID, const char *Kind);
```

The function accepts the following arguments:
- `Address` is an address of a variable, which exists in an application on host
- `UniqueID` is a unique symbolic ID, which corresponds to that variable
- `Kind` is a string which corresponds to `kind` argument passed to
  `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` attribute attached
  to the type of the variable identified by `Address`. It can be used to
  distinguish different entities like `specialization_id` and `device_global`:
  for example they could be stored in different maps to speed up certain
  operations with them.

The compiler guarantees that the function will be called zero or more times
(depending on the amount of uniquely identifiable objects found in a program)

> _before_ application's `main()` function, i.e. in a global constructor.

Reviewer 3: We should make a slightly stronger guarantee.  We should guarantee that this function is called *before* any user-defined global constructors in the same translation unit.  This means that is *will* be legal to access the global variable from another global constructor, so long as that constructor appears after the global variable in the same translation unit.  For example, this should be legal:

```
#include <sycl/sycl.hpp>

device_global<int> Foo;

struct MyConstructor {
  MyConstructor() {
    // Use Foo here
  }
};

// This global constructor guaranteed to be called after compiler calls
// __register_uniquely_identifiable_object() for "Foo".
MyConstructor MyVar;
```

Author: Thanks for noticing, updated the wording in 323579e3af450b4faa445fa1cc964a85f046e0a2

> That poses some restrictions on those uniquely identifiable object, i.e. that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That poses some restrictions on those uniquely identifiable objects, i.e. that
```

Author: Applied in 6c7a9be71e57c2855e87e18de145a833629dc060

they can't be used from another global object due to risk of accessing a
non-initialized object, but that is an UB anyway because the order of global
objects initialization is not defined in C++ when those objects are defined in

> different translation unit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a different translation unit.
```

## Compiler driver part

The compiler driver is the component which is responsible for selecting the
approach we are taking and the decision is made based on whether or not
3rd-party host compiler is in use.

> If `-fsycl-host-compiler` option is present, the compiler driver chooses the

Reviewer 2: What will happen if `-fsycl-host-compiler=clang++` is passed?

Author: I honestly don't know what is the algorithm of determining an absolute path to a 3rd-party host compiler specified through that argument, but I suggest that we always assume that any compiler passed through the flag is a 3rd-party one: I simply don't think that it worth to implement compiler detection here, because even `clang++` can point to the upstream clang, for example and it doesn't have customizations we need.

integration footer approach:
- it supplies device compilation step with `-fsycl-int-footer` option to

>   instruct device compiler to emit integration footer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  instruct device compiler to emit an integration footer
```

Author: Applied in 6c7a9be71e57c2855e87e18de145a833629dc060

- it appends the integration footer to user-provided translation unit before
  passing it to a host compiler

Otherwise, if `-fsycl-host-compiler` is not present, then the compiler driver
chooses another approach by simply doing nothing related to integration footer:
- `-fsycl-int-footer` is **not** passed to device compiler
- user-provided translation unit is passes as-is to host compiler

## Integration footer approach

When this approach is used, not only extra file (integration footer) is
generated, but integration header is also modified: FE compiler generates a
definition of a namespace scope variable of type

> `__sycl_device_global_registration` whose sole purpose it to run its constructor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`__sycl_device_global_registration` whose sole purpose is to run its constructor
```

Author: Applied in 6c7a9be71e57c2855e87e18de145a833629dc060

before the application's `main()` function:

```
namespace sycl::detail {
namespace {

> class __sycl_device_global_registration {

Reviewer 2: Did I get it right that presence of a variable whose type is marked with `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]` attribute triggers emission of this content in integration footer and header?
Right now presence of `device_global` and specialization_id variable trigger that, `device_global` is recognized via attribute, `specialization_id` is recognized by class name.

Author: > Did I get it right that presence of a variable whose type is marked with [[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)] attribute triggers emission of this content in integration footer and header?

Right. We can even choose to always emit the registration object, but leave its constructor empty if we haven't found any uniquely identifiable objects

Reviewer 5: This will however only happen when 3rd part host compiler is used right? For DPCPP compiler, we will need to modify current implementation to use other approach right?

Author: > This will however only happen when 3rd part host compiler is used right? For DPCPP compiler, we will need to modify current implementation to use other approach right?

Yes, I think that my previous comment is not entirely correct, because when DPCPP compiler is used as host as well, we are not supposed to emit integration footer at all, which means that the registration object should not be emitted as well to avoid errors about undefined functions at link time.

To summarize:
When integration footer is enabled, we emit the registration object in the header and we emit its constructor in the footer (possibly empty). When integration footer is disabled, we don't emit the registration object at all.

 public:
  __sycl_device_global_registration() noexcept;
};
__sycl_device_global_registration __sycl_device_global_registrar;

} // namespace (unnamed)
} // namespace sycl::detail
```

The integration footer generated by the compiler contains the definition of the
constructor, which calls a function in the DPC++ runtime, which registers
needed mappings:

```
namespace sycl::detail {
namespace {

__sycl_device_global_registration::__sycl_device_global_registration() noexcept {
  __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(
    &::Foo,
    /* same string returned from __builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id(::Foo) */,

>     "specialization_id");

Reviewer 2: What is the third parameter ("specialization_id") stands for?

Author: The third parameter should contain the string passed to `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` attribute. There is a description for it in the section about common runtime part.

  __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(
    &::inner::Bar,
    /* same string returned from __builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id(::inner::Bar) */,
    "device_global");
}

} // namespace (unnamed)
} // namespace sycl::detail
```

## Custom host compiler approach

With this approach, we simply schedule a one more pass in the optimization
pipeline, which should be executed regardless of the optimization level, because
it is required for proper functioning of some features.

The pass does similar thing to integration footer: it emits a global constructor
which in turn calls `__register_uniquely_identifiable_object` to provide the
runtime with required mapping information.

Unlike with integration footer approach no separate file is being generated,
which preserves all source files mapping and checksums to be in place and
correct.

Generated constructor function should have internal linkage to avoid possible
names clashes and multiple definition errors later at link stage.

Generated constructor contains a call to
`__register_uniquely_identifiable_object` for each global variable which has

> `sycl-unique-id` and `sycl-uid-kind` attributes, passing values of those

Author: Applied in e6938d89f28538143c51ba3472c9185ead49f953: I prefer `kind` to type, so I instead changed a previous occurrence of `type` to `kind` to make everything aligned

# Mapping host variables to compiler-generated info

[SYCL 2020][sycl-2020-spec] specification and some extensions such as
[SYCL_INTEL_device_global][device-global-ext-spec] imply that implementation is

> capable to somehow map addresses of a host objects to their counterparts in

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

device programs.

For example, in order to implement specialization constants on top of SPIR-V, we

> need to be able to map addresses of `specialization_id` variables into numeric

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

IDs of corresponding specialization constants at SPIR-V level.

Another example is device global [implementation][device-global-design], where
in order to communicate a value of `device_global` variable between host and

> device we need to map its host address to a symbolic name/identifier and some

Author: I've added an example in 5b690487755936bbb07ae28cf37c1f82aa096027, but I don't think that we need to put all the details into this doc: `device_global` implementation design is covered by a separate document

other info, which is used at PI layer and below.

> This design document describes a generic way how to map address of any SYCL

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

object defined in a namespace scope to its unique symbolic ID. Please note that
this document doesn't try to map the address to something other than a unique
symbolic ID: other required information is usually generated by the device
compiler and communicated to the runtime by device image properties. Unique
symbolic ID which can be obtained from mapping mechanism described in this
design document could be used as a key in those properties to propagate
additional information using existing mechanisms.

> So, overall the picture looks like:

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

> - device compiler generates property set/s which provide mapping

Author: Updated the wording of this item in 5b690487755936bbb07ae28cf37c1f82aa096027.

This document should be read as a generic design document which does not describe any/all features in depth. It simply outlines how particular interface is implemented, but the rest should be found in design documents for the corresponding features.

  "unique symbolic ID" -> "various information required by DPC++ RT"
- device or host compiler generates mapping
  "address of a host variable" -> "unique symbolic ID" (as described below by
  this document)
- DPC++ RT uses these two mappings to obtain required information and somehow

>   uses it

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

This design document describes two approaches of how the 

> "address of a host variable" -> "unique symbolic ID" mapping can be generated:

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

the first one with integration footer and another one with modification of the
host compiler.

Both approaches have their pros and cons and they are expected to be implemented
and exist in the implementation at the same time, but only one of them will be

> used at a time depending on whether 3rd-party host compiler is used or not.

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

> Integration footer can be used with 3rd-party host compilers, but it requires

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

appending to a translation unit provided by a user, which could affect debug

> information: since there are no compilers that support appending a file at the

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

end (similar to `-include`), appending is done by generating a temporary input
file using concatenation of the original input and integration footer.

Such replacement of the main translation unit causes the following issues:
- debug information about the source file might be incorrect, leading to
  problems with gdb `l` command and code coverage tools
- checksum of host and device source files becomes different which causes device
  code debugging to be completely broken in some environments (such as MS Visual
  Studio, for example)

Customizing host compiler allows to avoid issues with debuggers and code
coverage tools, but that is not an option if a user wants to compile host part
of an app with a 3rd-party host compiler.

Further sections describe the implementation design of both approaches in more
details, note that there are few components which should be modified regardless

> of which approach is in use.

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

## Common front-end part

DPC++ FE should support the following attribute:
`[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]`. This attribute accepts
a string literal and should be applied to types (like `device_global` or
`specialization_id`).

> Presence of the attribute instructs the compiler to perform the following

Author: Added in 90d8cd11570487c45bac56844ac964f716661264

things:

> - emit `sycl-unique-id` LLVM IR attribute on each definition of a variable of

Author: No, `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` will be limited to semantic checks only: I will update device global design doc to incorporate the change there

  type marked with `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]`
  attribute. `sycl-unique-id` LLVM IR attribute should be accompanied by a

>   unique string identifier of a variable it is attached to. The rules for

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

  creating this string are the same as for `__builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id` and
  the same algorithm can be used when generating the string for the attribute
- emit `sycl-uid-kind` LLVM IR attribute alongside `sycl-unique-id`, which

>   contains the `kind` string passed to

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

  `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` attribute

**TODO**: we have `[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` attribute documented in
[device global design doc][device-global-design], which instructs front-end to
emit some additional semantic checking. Shall we leave it in place or that
request for semantic checking should also be documented by

> `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` attribute when `kind`

Author: Updated the wording to say which attribute is responsible for semantic checks and which isn't in aff7c4b9bf4f0ff9b76684d575128998cc95e9fb

is set to a certain value?

**TODO**: alternatively, we could completely re-use existing
`[[__sycl_detail__::device_global]]` attribute and introduce another one for
specialization constants, i.e. it is a question of whether or not we want to
generalize unique IDs generation in form of a generic attribute or not.

When DPC++ compiler is used as both host and device compiler, then the attribute
should be respected by both host and device compiler passes and LLVM IR
attributes should appear in LLVM IR for both host and device code. When DPC++
compiler is only used as a device compiler, then we don't expect the attribute

> to be handled on host, apparently.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
to be handled on host.
```

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

> Another thing we need from DPC++ FE host compiler is to define a special macro,

Reviewer 5: There has been a lot of discussion about not wanting to uniquely identifying intel/llvm compiler in the past. @pvchupin is this alright? We need a way to tell DPCPP compiler is used for host compilation vs a custom host compiler. Proposed solution is a macro

Author: Note that this macro should not necessarily be a public documented macro: it is perfectly fine to have an internal macro, which is even set by the driver and not attached to a particular clang target. We simply need a way to write an `#ifdef` to remove the custom attribute usage when a 3rd-party host is used to avoid generating warnings about unsupported attributes

Reviewer 5: I see. Thanks for explaining. I think that should be fine then.

which will allow to distinguish it from other host compilers. That is needed to

> apply the aforementioned attribute conditionally to avoid spamming users with

Reviewer 5: Can you explain this further? Won't this issue exist for all attributes in headers at the moment - since none will be recognized by custom host compiler? Anyway these attributes will be used in headers right? I need to verify this but I believe we suppress warnings from headers. @Fznamznon do you know?

Author: > Can you explain this further? Won't this issue exist for all attributes in headers at the moment - since none will be recognized by 3rd party host compiler?

Yes, the issue will exists for all of the existing attributes, but they can be split into two groups:
- non-user-visible ones, which we set internally in our headers: AFAIK, all of them are for device code (i.e. guarded by `#ifdef __SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__` and the only exception is the attribute I'm proposing here
- user-visible ones, which were explicitly set by users - for them warnings from host compiler are expected, I suppose

> I need to verify this but I believe we suppress warnings from headers. 

AFAIK, we treat `sycl.hpp` as a system include, which suppresses all warnings coming out of it

Reviewer 5: >guarded by #ifdef __SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__ and the only exception is the attribute I'm proposing here

OK. Makes sense

>Not sure that other compilers do that though.

Oh right.  My bad.

warnings about unknown attributes.

**NOTE:** Alternatively we could simply set a macro which tells us whether or
not integration footer is enabled in the compiler driver instead of creating
a special macro for differentiating our own host compiler.

> The suggested macro name is `__INTEL_SYCL_HOST_COMPILER__`. It should be defined

Reviewer 5: I don't know if we can use 'INTEL' in the name if we're proposing this for syclos, especially if we want to upstream this at some point. I'm also not sure if we need senior management input for using INTEL in macro name. I guess its less of a concern if its not a documented macro, but it might be better to just have a macro which indicates footer is included or something.

Author: I've just remembered that there is a `__SYCL_SINGLE_SOURCE__` macro documented in the [spec](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_preprocessor_directives_and_macros), which we should use here.

AFAIK, it is not yet supported, but now it seems to be the time

Reviewer 3: I don't think  we should use `__SYCL_SINGLE_SOURCE__` for this purpose.  The intent of that macro is to indicate a compiler that produces both host and device code in a single pass (i.e. the CFE runs just once, and then both host and device code are produced from that common IR).  This is not the case for DPC++.

Author: > The intent of that macro is to indicate a compiler that produces both host and device code in a single pass (i.e. the CFE runs just once, and then both host and device code are produced from that common IR).

Well, the spec says literally nothing about the number of CFE runs and based on the spec wording, DPC++ seems to be a single source compiler:

 > which produces host as well as device binary;
 
 Anyway, I'm perfectly fine with using another macro introduced by ourselves, we just need to be able to detect that we are in integration footer mode, which will imply that we are in 3rd-party host compiler mode, which will mean do not use an attribute to avoid the warning

Reviewer 5: My understanding of spec matches @AlexeySachkov's. Unless 'single-source compiler' has standardized meaning I am unaware of, it sounds like `__SYCL_SINGLE_SOURCE__` works here 

> __SYCL_SINGLE_SOURCE__ is defined to 1 if the source file is being compiled with a SYCL single-source compiler which produces host as well as device binary;

If we can't use this, WDYT about just having a macro __INTEGRATION_FOOTER__ defined in footer.

Author: > If we can't use this, WDYT about just having a macro INTEGRATION_FOOTER defined in footer.

We need this macro available in regular SYCL headers, so I think that we will end up with setting something internal (`__MACRO_NAME__`) in the driver

  for example they could be stored in different maps to speed up certain
  operations with them.

The compiler guarantees that the function will be called zero or more times
(depending on the amount of uniquely identifiable objects found in a program)
_before_ application's `main()` function and _before_ any other global
constructor defined in the same translation unit: this is needed to allow usages
of `specialization_id` and `device_global` variables from user-defined global
constructors.

That poses some restrictions on those uniquely identifiable objects, i.e. that
they can't be used from another global object due to risk of accessing a
non-initialized object, but that is an UB anyway because the order of global
objects initialization is not defined in C++ when those objects are defined in
a different translation unit.

## Compiler driver part

The compiler driver is the component which is responsible for selecting the
approach we are taking and the decision is made based on whether or not
3rd-party host compiler is in use.

If `-fsycl-host-compiler` option is present, the compiler driver chooses the
integration footer approach:

> - it supplies device compilation step with `-fsycl-int-footer` option to

Reviewer 5: @mdtoguchi - possible change to how `-fsycl-int-footer` is passed

  instruct device compiler to emit an integration footer
- it appends the integration footer to user-provided translation unit before
  passing it to a host compiler

Otherwise, if `-fsycl-host-compiler` is not present, then the compiler driver
chooses another approach by simply doing nothing related to integration footer:
- `-fsycl-int-footer` is **not** passed to device compiler
- user-provided translation unit is passes as-is to host compiler

## Integration footer approach

> When this approach is used, not only extra file (integration footer) is
> generated, but integration header is also modified: FE compiler generates a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When this approach is used, not only is an extra file (integration footer) 
generated, but the integration header is also modified: FE compiler generates a
```

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

  return FuBar;   // References 'FuBar' in the unnamed namespace
}

} // namespace __sycl_detail
} // namespace (unnamed)

namespace sycl::detail {

__sycl_device_global_registration::__sycl_device_global_registration() noexcept {
  __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(
    &::FuBar,
    /* same string returned from __builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id(::FuBar) */,
    "device_global");
  __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(
    &::__sycl_detail::__shim_1(),
    /* same string returned from __builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id(::(unnamed)::FuBar) */,
    "device_global");
}

} // namespace sycl::detail
```

The `__shim_1()` function is defined in the same namespace as the second
`FuBar` device global, so it can reference the variable through unqualified
name lookup.  Furthermore, the name of the shim function is globally unique, so
it is guaranteed not to be shadowed by any other name in the translation unit.
This problem with variable shadowing is also a problem for the integration
footer we use for specialization constants.  See the [specialization constant
design document][5] for more details on this topic.

[5]: <SpecializationConstants.md>

> ## Custom host compiler approach

Reviewer 5: This is when we use DPCPP host compiler right? 'Custom' host compiler is confusing here because sometimes that is how we refer to 3rd party host compilers

Author: Done in e963911a9455e5508174ae38d51a313d68182d47

> With this approach, we simply schedule a one more pass in the optimization

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With this approach, we simply schedule one more pass in the optimization
```

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

pipeline, which should be executed regardless of the optimization level, because
it is required for proper functioning of some features.

> The pass does similar thing to integration footer: it emits a global constructor

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The pass has functionality similar to the integration footer, i.e. it emits a global constructor
```

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

which in turn calls `__register_uniquely_identifiable_object` to provide the
runtime with required mapping information.

> Unlike with integration footer approach no separate file is being generated,
> which preserves all source files mapping and checksums to be in place and
> correct.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Unlike with the integration footer approach, no separate file is being generated.
This preserves all source files mapping and checksums to be in place and
correct.
```

Author: Applied in 5a1c630fb2dd17aeabef632ed4d56ae74bd00420

a string literal and should be applied to types (like `device_global` or
`specialization_id`).

Presence of the attribute instructs the compiler to perform the following
things:
- emit `sycl-unique-id` LLVM IR attribute on each definition of a variable of
  type marked with `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]`
  attribute. `sycl-unique-id` LLVM IR attribute should be accompanied by a
  unique string identifier of the variable it is attached to. The rules for
  creating this string are the same as for `__builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id` and
  the same algorithm can be used when generating the string for the attribute
- emit `sycl-uid-kind` LLVM IR attribute alongside `sycl-unique-id`, which
  contains the `kind` string passed via
  `[[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object(kind)]]` attribute

To illustrate, here is a SYCL code snippet:

```
template <typename T>
class
  // Note: the attribute usage will be guarded by macro to be only applied when
  // DPC++ compiler is used to avoid generating warnings. That is described
  // later in the doc
  [[__sycl_detail__::uniquely_identifiable_object("specialization_id")]]
  specialization_id {
  // ...
};

> specialization_id<int> spec_const(38);

Reviewer 2: Device code outlining scheme works in a way that if this `spec_const` variable is not referenced from device code context, then it won't be emitted. I see that later some info is attached to it. Should we somehow force emission uniquely identifiable objects then?

Author: No, we don't need to force emission of uniquely identifiable objects if they are not used from device code. I've added a comment saying that for this snippet we expect `spec_const` to be used from device code in 96c0e37279fa1a74b4db818b59e85d98a50379a6

```

> After processed by DPC++ compiler, it will result in the following LLVM IR:

Reviewer 2: You mean LLVM IR for device?

Author: I mean for both host and device: there is a paragraph a bit below, which says that. Please let me know how to better rearrange and/or rephrase that to make it more clear

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should mention at the very beginning of attributes description that they trigger emission of new data for both host and device code. This a unique situation among SYCL attributes, so I kind of assumed that it will happen only for device code.

generated, but the integration header is also modified: FE compiler generates a
definition of a namespace scope variable of type
`__sycl_device_global_registration` whose sole purpose is to run its constructor
before the application's `main()` function:

```
namespace sycl::detail {
namespace {

class __sycl_device_global_registration {
 public:
  __sycl_device_global_registration() noexcept;
};
__sycl_device_global_registration __sycl_device_global_registrar;

} // namespace (unnamed)
} // namespace sycl::detail
```

Examples below are written for the following code snippet:

```
#include <sycl/sycl.hpp>

static sycl::device_global<int> Foo;
namespace inner {
  sycl::device_global<double[2]> Bar;
} // namespace inner

// ...
```

The integration footer generated by the compiler contains the definition of the
constructor, which calls a function in the DPC++ runtime, which registers
needed mappings:

```
namespace sycl::detail {
namespace {

__sycl_device_global_registration::__sycl_device_global_registration() noexcept {
  __register_uniquely_identifiable_object(
    &::Foo,
    /* same string returned from __builtin_sycl_unique_stable_id(::Foo) */,

>     "device_global");

Reviewer 2: Can we add a comment or mention somewhere that this third parameter is "kind" argument of corresponding attribute?

Author: I plan to remove the `kind` completely, so the snippet will be simplified and the comment won't be applicable anymore

[5]: <SpecializationConstants.md>

## Custom host compiler approach

With this approach, we simply schedule one more pass in the optimization
pipeline, which should be executed regardless of the optimization level, because
it is required for proper functioning of some features.

The pass has functionality similar to the integration footer, i.e. it emits a
global constructor which in turn calls `__register_uniquely_identifiable_object`
to provide the runtime with required mapping information.

Unlike with the integration footer approach, no separate file is being
generated. This preserves all source files mapping and checksums to be in place
and correct.

Generated constructor function should have internal linkage to avoid possible
names clashes and multiple definition errors later at link stage.

Generated constructor contains a call to
`__register_uniquely_identifiable_object` for each global variable which has
`sycl-unique-id` and `sycl-uid-kind` attributes, passing values of those
attributes into the corresponding arguments of the function.

### Handling shadowed variables

Unlike with the integration footer the problem with shadowed variables doesn't

> really exists with the custom host compiler approach, because it is compiler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
really exists with the custom host compiler approach, because it is compiler's
```

Author: Applied in 96c0e37279fa1a74b4db818b59e85d98a50379a6
